---
layout: post
title: "Debugging a live saturn V"
description: ""
category: post
tags: []
---

We all have stories, as engineers, of fixing some crazy thing at the
last minute right before the demo goes up. We have all encountered
situations where we needed to fix something that was our fault and we
needed to fix it now.

This story is something that I think about in those times to remember
to stay calm. No last minute fix could ever be this dramatic or
important.

My grandfather passed away about a week ago. At the service, I was
asked to say a few words and read from his memoirs. This was my
choice.

----

## RED TEAM 4 TO THE POD

*The first unmanned launch of a Saturn V on November 9th. 1967. From
 the personal memoirs and the pen of William E. Moore
 January 28th. 1994.*

<br />

There was five of us Rocket Scientists lounging around the ready room
listening to the Apollo 4 Countdown on loud speakers and headsets. We
were members of the Red Team Group and we were the Electrical Systems
experts on all hardware interfaces between the firing room and the
Saturn V vehicle three miles away. Our ears were now being drawn into
a developing situation happening on the net. No response was received
from an electrical circuit that controlled the separation of the S11
Stage from the S1 Stage in flight.
> "That was one of my electrical circuits!"

It just so happened that circuit is controlled by a series of relays
located almost directly beneath that cold beast that was spewing out
all kinds of funny colored, very cold gases -- the Saturn V rocket. We
took a look at our blue prints and found the relay that must be the
problem and called for a recycle in the countdown to a point where we
could cycle the switch on the electrical networks console to see if
the relay would pick up -- that was a "no go". Now things got
serious. The NASA Test Conductor was talking 'scrub the launch' but
our S2 Stage Test Conductor was talking 'go to the pad'.

<br />
Well, the Red Phone rings.

> "Bill, how sure are you that this relay is the problem? Are we going
> to send people to the pad to rewire the rocket and not be able to
> launch because we guessed wrong?" said "AC" Filbert C. Martin

<span>
> "It's worth a shot, the signal is not reaching the vehicle and that
> relay module is the only active component between the Firing Room
> Console and the Vehicle. You snap out the old Relay Module and snap
> in the new one and we will be able to tell if that was the problem a
> few seconds later."

<span>
>"Well, we are a little concerned about sending a team to the pad with
>a fully loaded vehicle. We thought your team would do a lot of
>blueprint trouble shooting -- I'm not sure we planned to actually
>send anybody out to a fueled vehicle"

<span>
> "Just don't let them launch this mother till we are at least half
> way back from the pad -- OK!"

About thirty minutes later the five of us (Bob Kelso NRR Sr. Tech,
Bill Moore; NAR Engineer/ Team Leader, the NASA Safety Engineer, the
NRR Quality Control and the NASA Pad Leader) got the official word to
head for the Launch Pad with our new Relay Pod. It was 11:30pm. It was
a dark, slow, three mile trip. As we got closer to the Saturn V it was
shrouded in a white cloud of venting gases which relieved the
pressures building up inside the vehicle fuel tanks.

Our goal was to enter this two level hermetically sealed, all welded
steel coffin called the Mobil Launcher Base topped by a fully loaded
363 ft. high Saturn V, weighing 6.2 million pounds, and the
permanently attached 380 ft. high Umbilical Tower, weighing 500k
pounds. We finally stopped and left our van to walk up and into the
second level of the Mobile Launcher Base. About this time, it came to
my mind that during one of our training sessions we were told that one
of the fully fueled prototype S11 rocket stages had been exploded out
in the desert. The results showed that all buildings better be at
least three miles from the launch pads - which they are. We were now
within 25 feet of this 363ft tall bomb that sounded like it's giant
fuse had been lit, and we were soon going to get much closer.

The Saturn V was more noisy and ghostly than I had ever expected and
it had grown much taller and certainly more threatening since last
week. The venting fuel made loud hissing sounds when relief valves
popped or opened up suddenly. It was very easy to let your imagination
infect your brain. This is a very dangerous place and everything seems
to be moving in the heavy foggy mist. There was no way to talk to each
other, heck, we could barely see each other and...we hadn't thought of
this problem so we held onto each others yellow protective clothing
like kindergartners crossing the street. We all wore safety helmets
but they just did not make you feel like you were really safe.

As we climbed up the last step prior to opening the sealed submarine
type entry door that led into the second level. We slowly opened the
heavy steel hatch-type pressurized door it was like stepping into the
jaws of a huge steaming dragon. The nitrogen fog, used to suppress
fire, and the dim red glow from the emergency lights of level A made
it look like a hollywood swamp scene. We started making our way
through the 21 compartments to find our Relay Rack as the noise took
on a more penetrating tone that seemed to bounce from wall to wall.

The smell became a mixture of kerosene with a mild touch of burnt
paint and rubber. I was glad that the astronauts did not take this
path to go aboard the Saturn V because my goosebumps were changing to
a weird color of purple. With the realization that this was a much
worse place to be trapped in, the team moved more rapidly to the relay
rack. We replaced the old relay module and then had to cycle the
switch on the firing room console. We then checked that the relay
kicked in and that the signal was picked up on the vehicle. We
resealed the cabinet, signed off on all the paperwork and got the out
of there without any more sight seeing.

The drive back to the ready room very was fast and uneventful. The
five of us were like stone figures, thinking about where we had been
and what we had just accomplished. What could have happened and
didn't. All of this without ever realizing that this experience was as
close to being in the shoes of an Saturn V Astronaut as any of us
would ever be again.

----

In later letters, my grandfather mentions how fortunate he really was,
having growing up a farm boy in West Virginia to have not just once in
a lifetime experiences, but really once in many lifetimes
experiences. The service was about celebrating his life, and this
seems like one of those incredibly unique events that really does
celebrate his life, both in terms of how he handled a mind bogglingly
stressful situation and how he tells it the comfortably detailed and
slyly humorous ease that was so characteristic of how he spoke.

A really incredible man who really contributed a lot to the world
around him and meant a lot to those close to him, he will be sorely
missed.
